[Format] Add Opaque canonical extension type (#41823)
apache/arrow: docs/source/format/CanonicalExtensions.rst

   A specific UUID version is not required or guaranteed. This extension represents
   UUIDs as FixedSizeBinary(16) with big-endian notation and does not interpret the bytes in any way.

Opaque

> =======

Reviewer: ```suggestion
======
```

   A specific UUID version is not required or guaranteed. This extension represents
   UUIDs as FixedSizeBinary(16) with big-endian notation and does not interpret the bytes in any way.

Unknown
=======

Unknown represents a type or array that an Arrow-based system received from an
external (often non-Arrow) system, which it cannot interpret itself or did not
have support for in advance.  In this case, it can pass on Unknown to its own
clients to communicate that a field exists, but that it cannot interpret the
field or data.

Extension parameters:

> * Extension name: ``arrow.unknown``.

Reviewer 2: On name bike shedding  I'll add `arrow.unsupported` or `arrow.external` given it is coming from an external system.  Unsupported, at least to me, reinforces the point that there shouldn't a convention around this.

  The client would presumably not be able to query such columns from the
  Flight SQL service, but there may be other columns in the table that it
  could query, or it could prepare a query that references the unknown column
  in an expression and produces a result that *is* supported.  The Unknown
  type is a better experience than erroring or silently dropping columns from
  the catalog.

  An example of the extension metadata would be::

    {"type_name": "varray", "vendor_name": "Oracle"}

* The ADBC PostgreSQL driver may get bytes for a field whose type it does not
  recognize.  This is because of how PostgreSQL and its wire protocol work:
  the driver will always get bytes for fields and must implement support for
  all potential types to interpret those bytes.  But the driver cannot know
  about all types in advance, as there may be extensions (e.g. PostGIS for
  geospatial functionality).

  Beacuse the driver still has the raw bytes, it can use Unknown[Binary] to
  return those bytes to the application, which may be able to parse the data
  itself.  Unknown differentiates the column from an actual binary column.

  An example of the extension metadata would be::

>     {"type_name": "geometry", "vendor_name": "PostGIS"}

Reviewer 2: will it always be the case that type_name will be utf-8 compatible?

Author: I think we'll have to require at least that, and so far Arrow hasn't really gotten into different text encodings

Reviewer 3: Type names not utf-8 compatible would mean they would use characters that don't exist in unicode? Let's ignore this possibility entirely :-)

Reviewer: FYI: JSON MUST use UTF-8: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8259#section-8.1

> JSON text exchanged between systems that are not part of a closed ecosystem MUST be encoded using UTF-8.

* The ADBC PostgreSQL driver may also get bytes for a field whose type it can
  only partially recognize.  For example, PostgreSQL supports `composite types
  <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/rowtypes.html>`_ that ascribe new
  semantics to existing types, somewhat like Arrow extension types.

  The driver would be able to parse the underlying type in this case.

>   However, the driver may still with to use the Unknown type.  Consider the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  However, the driver may still want to use the Unknown type.  Consider the
```

  example in the PostgreSQL documentation above of a ``complex`` type.  Just
  mapping the type to a plain Arrow ``struct`` type would lose the semantics
  of that custom type.  In this case, the driver can use Unknown[Struct].  The
  driver would never actually be able to directly support the type in this
  example, since these types are defined by database administrators, not by
  the developers.

  An example of the extension metadata would be::

    {"type_name": "database_name.schema_name.complex", "vendor_name": "PostgreSQL"}

* The JDBC adapter in the Arrow Java libraries converts JDBC result sets into
  Arrow arrays, and also to get Arrow schemas from result sets.  JDBC,
  however, allows drivers to return `arbitrary Java objects
  <https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/sql/Types.html#OTHER>`_.

  Currently, the JDBC adapter simply errors, making usage of the adapter a
  minefield where results are all-or-nothing, even if an application just

>   wants to fetch a schema.  Instead, the driver could use Unknown[Null] as a

Reviewer 4: This "currently" will get out of date rather quickly (assuming there are plans to make use of this extension type in the JDBC adapter)? So maybe could also future proof it by saying something like "Without this extension type, the adapter would simply error .."

Author: ```suggestion
  Without the extension type, the JDBC adapter would simply error, making the
  adapter a minefield where results are all-or-nothing, even if an application
  just wants a schema.  Instead, the driver could use Unknown[Null] as a
```

  placeholder during schema conversion, only erroring if the application tries
  to fetch the actual data.  That way, clients could at least introspect
  tables and queries to decide whether it can proceed to query the data, or
  only query certain columns.

  An example of the extension metadata would be::

    {"type_name": "OTHER", "vendor_name": "JDBC driver name"}

Of course, the intermediate system *could* implement custom extension types in
these cases.  But there is no way that every type can be known in advance, as
discussed specifically for each example.  In such cases, the Unknown type
allows the system to explicitly note that it does not support some type or
field, without silently losing data or sending irrelevant errors.

Another option would be to pretend to support the type and make up new
extension types on the fly.  But this misleads downstream systems who cannot
tell if the type is truly supported or not by the intermediate Arrow
application (the Flight SQL service, or the JDBC adapter, etc.), which
particularly matters for the Flight SQL and JDBC examples.

> Applications **should not** make conventions around vendor_name and type_name.

Reviewer 2: IMO, it might pay to move this and the next paragraph into a section above, and refer to examples of what good uses look like.

Author: Updated again, though I still think starting the discussion with the mindset of MIME types and JSON has distracted people and inflated the required prose a lot since this type is now being approached from an irrelevant angle.

   A specific UUID version is not required or guaranteed. This extension represents
   UUIDs as FixedSizeBinary(16) with big-endian notation and does not interpret the bytes in any way.

Opaque
=======

Opaque represents a type or array that an Arrow-based system received from an
external (often non-Arrow) system, which it cannot interpret or did not have
support for in advance.  In this case, it can pass on Opaque to its clients to
show that a field exists, but that it cannot interpret the field or data.

Extension parameters:

* Extension name: ``arrow.opaque``.

* The storage type of this extension is any type.  If there is no underlying
  data, the storage type should be Null.

* Extension type parameters:

  * **type_name** = the name of the unknown type in the external system.
  * **vendor_name** = the name of the external system.

* Description of the serialization:

  A valid JSON object containing the parameters as fields.  In the future,
  additional fields may be added, but all fields current and future are never
  required to interpret the array.

Rationale
---------

> 

Reviewer 3: I think it would be nice to make the rationale shorter because, as it is, many people will not read it at all.

For example:
> Arrow systems often wrap non-Arrow systems, and so they must be prepared to handle data types and data that don't have an equivalent Arrow type. Some columns in the original data may not be representable at all using Arrow, yet we might still want to signal its presence.
>
> Instead of trying to make up a separate extension type for every possible non-Arrow data type (including ones that the Arrow system was not expecting to receive at all), the Opaque type can be used instead. Because it explicitly means that we do not support a type, it can be used to declare an unsupported field or column. In other words: if an Arrow system encounters a non-Arrow type it was not prepared to handle, it can use Opaque to still pass the type on to a client.

Reviewer 5: I think it is worthwhile to keep the explanation of the inadequacy of other solutions, even if it does make this section somewhat lengthy.

Author: I did shorten this section and reformatted the other solutions as bullet points, hopefully that helps

Arrow systems often wrap non-Arrow systems, and so they must be prepared to
handle data types and data that don't have an equivalent Arrow type.  A client
may still want to know of the existence of a field, or the types of other,
supported fields.  So returning an error because of an unrecognized type in
one column, or dropping unsupported fields/columns, are poor solutions.

Of course, the Arrow system can use extension types.  But it will not have an
extension type prepared for every possible type in advance; for example, the
non-Arrow system may have its own extension mechanisms.  It could "make up" an
extension type on the fly.  But this misleads clients who cannot tell if the
type is truly supported or not by the intermediate Arrow application.

The Opaque type can be used instead.  Because it explicitly means that the

> *intermediate* system does not support a type, it can be used to declare an

Author: This was because people wanted a justification for the type...

unsupported field or column without silently losing data or erroring.  In
other words: if an Arrow system encounters a non-Arrow type it was not
prepared to handle, it can use Opaque to still pass the type on to a client.

> Applications **should not** make conventions around vendor_name and type_name.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure about this paragraph. In particular, it seems reasonable to make conventions around the vendor name.
Similarly, a reasonable convention for the type name would be something like "the original system's unabbreviated type name".

Author: That's very much not the point. This is not meant to replace having actual extension types, it is a stop gap as stated several times.

Reviewer 3: Why does that preclude well-known vendor names?

Author: (1), I don't want to extend this document further. I thought it was already too long? :) (2), I don't want to encourage standardization here. It is explicitly meant as a free-for-all. As it states, it is meant for humans, and humans will not care about Postgres vs PostgreSQL.

Reviewer 3: Well, things meant for humans tend to up parsed by machines anyway (think CLI interfaces).
That said, let's keep it like this if you feel so strongly about it.

Author: Perhaps a concrete example would help.

Reviewer 5: This sentence
> Applications **should not** make conventions around vendor_name and type_name.

is vitally important for understanding what Opaque is intended for. I think it would be good to repeat this (or paraphrase it) higher above, immediately after defining the extension type parameters. This will prevent readers from immediately getting wrong ideas about what Opaque is intended for.

Perhaps we could paraphrase it like:

> Developers **should not** attempt to enable public semantic interoperability of Opaque by canonicalizing specific values of these parameters.

and add that just below where the parameters are defined.

Author: Thanks, updated.

If there is a type that multiple systems want to support, they should create a
formal extension type.  They *should not* try to agree on particular
parameters of the Opaque type.  These parameters are meant for human end users
to understand what type was not supported.  Of course, applications may
interpret these fields regardless, but must be prepared for breakage (if for
example the type becomes supported with a custom extension type in a later
software revision).

> Opaque is not about file formats.  Considerations such as MIME types are
> irrelevant, and Opaque should not be thought of as a generic container for
> file format data (XML/JSON/etc.).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Opaque is not about file formats.  Considerations such as MIME types are
irrelevant, and Opaque should not be thought of as a generic container for
file format data (XML/JSON/etc.). If a well-known kind of data needs to be
represented, a dedicated extension type should be create for it.
```

Author: It is already stated above that you should make new extension types. I don't understand why we feel this is simultaneously too detailed/explicit and yet we are trying to make it more verbose; I only added this paragraph because of persistent misunderstanding in the first place.

Examples:

> * Consider a Flight SQL service that supports connecting external databases.

Reviewer 3: The examples are similarly long-winded. We could perhaps keep the gist of them, but without the overly long explanations? Example:

> A Flight SQL service can be used to connect to an external database that supports types not representable in Arrow. When listing the types of table columns in such a database, the Flight SQL service would fail to return information about non-representable types. Using the Opaque type, however, it can still communicate information about those columns instead of ignoring them entirely.
>
> An example of the extension metadata, when connected to a well-known proprietary database, would be [etc.]

   A specific UUID version is not required or guaranteed. This extension represents
   UUIDs as FixedSizeBinary(16) with big-endian notation and does not interpret the bytes in any way.

Unknown
=======

Unknown represents a type or array that an Arrow-based system received from an
external (often non-Arrow) system, which it cannot interpret itself or did not
have support for in advance.  In this case, it can pass on Unknown to its own
clients to communicate that a field exists, but that it cannot interpret the
field or data.

Extension parameters:

* Extension name: ``arrow.unknown``.

* The storage type of this extension is any type.  If there is no underlying
  data, the storage type should be Null.  If there is data, the storage type

>   should preferably be binary or fixed-size binary, but may be any type.

Reviewer 6: why do we say that it should preferably be binary or fixed-size binary?

Author: Originally @pitrou's suggestion IIRC, but most likely if you have uninterpretable data it's probably a binary blob.

Reviewer 6: ok, I understand that it will probably be a binary blob but saying on the spec that `should probably be` was confusing to me. Thanks for the clarification

Author: I removed it, it's not so necessary (and it leaves out BinaryView anyways)

   A specific UUID version is not required or guaranteed. This extension represents
   UUIDs as FixedSizeBinary(16) with big-endian notation and does not interpret the bytes in any way.

Other
=====

Other represents a type or array that one Arrow-based system received from an
external (likely non-Arrow) system, but cannot interpret itself.  In this
case, the Other type explicitly communicates the name and presence of a field
to downstream clients.

For example:

* A Flight SQL service may support connecting external databases.  In this
  case, its catalog (``GetTables`` etc.) should reflect the names and types of
  tables in external databases.  These tables may support types it does not
  recognize.  Instead of erroring or silently dropping columns from the

>   catalog, it can use the Other[NA] type to report that a column exists with a

Reviewer 7: Does `NA` here mean the NULL type?

  geospatial type).  It can still return the bytes to the application which
  may be able to parse the data itself.  In that case, it can use the
  Other[binary] type to return the column data.  The Other type differentiates
  the column from actual binary columns.

Extension parameters:

* Extension name: ``arrow.other``.

* The storage type of this extension is any type.  If there is no underlying
  data, the storage type should be NA.  If there is data (because the system
  got bytes or some other data it does not know how to interpret), the storage
  type should preferably be binary or fixed-size binary, but may be any type.

* Extension type parameters:

  * **type_name** = the name of the unknown type in the external system.

* Description of the serialization:

  A valid JSON object containing the parameters as fields.  In the future,
  additional fields may be added, but all fields current and future are never
  required to interpret the array.

  For example:

  - The PostgreSQL ``polygon`` type may be represented as Other[binary] with
    metadata ``{"type_name": "polygon"}``.
  - The PostgreSQL ``point`` type may be represented as

>     Other[fixed_size_binary[16]] with metadata ``{"type_name": "point"}``.

Reviewer 8: Nit: we can't really require, but shall we suggest use of namespaces indicating where the type is defined? e.g. `geoparquet.polygon`?

Author: It might be better to break out a `source_system` (naming TBD) field so that it's clear what the underlying system calls the type? Because here, polygon is meant to be the **PostgreSQL** polygon type.

Reviewer 8: Sounds good, just looking to disambiguate types that multiple systems might call the same name but could in practice be different.

  Other[binary] type to return the column data.  The Other type differentiates
  the column from actual binary columns.

Extension parameters:

* Extension name: ``arrow.other``.

* The storage type of this extension is any type.  If there is no underlying
  data, the storage type should be NA.  If there is data (because the system
  got bytes or some other data it does not know how to interpret), the storage
  type should preferably be binary or fixed-size binary, but may be any type.

* Extension type parameters:

  * **type_name** = the name of the unknown type in the external system.
  * **vendor_name** = the name of the external system.

* Description of the serialization:

  A valid JSON object containing the parameters as fields.  In the future,
  additional fields may be added, but all fields current and future are never
  required to interpret the array.

  For example:

  - The PostgreSQL ``polygon`` type may be represented as Other[binary] with
    metadata ``{"type_name": "polygon", "vendor_name": "PostgreSQL"}``.
  - The PostgreSQL ``point`` type may be represented as
    Other[fixed_size_binary[16]] with metadata

>     ``{"type_name": "point", "vendor_name": "PostgreSQL"}``.

Author: Updated the example.

  it does not recognize.  Instead of erroring or silently dropping columns
  from the catalog, it can use the Other[Null] type to report that a column
  exists with a particular name and type name in the external database; this
  lets clients know that a column exists, but is not supported.

* The ADBC PostgreSQL driver, because of how the PostgreSQL wire protocol
  works, may get bytes for a field whose type it does not recognize (say, a
  geospatial type).  It can still return the bytes to the application which
  may be able to parse the data itself.  In that case, it can use the
  Other[binary] type to return the column data.  The Other type differentiates
  the column from actual binary columns.

Of course, the intermediate system *could* implement a custom extension type
for these example types.  But there is no way in general that every type can
be known in advance.  In such cases, the Other type allows the system to
explicitly note that it does not support some type or field, without silently
losing data or sending irrelevant errors.  It could also pretend to support
the types by making up extension types on the fly.  But this misleads

> downstream systems who cannot tell if the type is supported or not.

Reviewer 4: @lidavidm thanks for the expanded explanation here, I think that makes the scope much clearer now

Extension parameters:

* Extension name: ``arrow.other``.

* The storage type of this extension is any type.  If there is no underlying
  data, the storage type should be Null.  If there is data (because the system
  got bytes or some other data it does not know how to interpret), the storage

>   type should preferably be binary or fixed-size binary, but may be any type.

Reviewer 3: Is it useful to leave this open? Binary always would probably work in all situations.

Reviewer 3: Though restricting to binary would probably not simplify things much...

Reviewer 3: > I can think of at least one use case where binary may not be sufficient: DuckDB currently returns types defined in extensions as whatever the underlying DuckDB type is, which could be many arrow types

But why would we use Other in this case?

Reviewer 3: I don't understand at all. Perhaps you can explain using a concrete example of information loss?

Reviewer 8: Perhaps if DuckDB returns an extension type that is not registered at consumer side?

Reviewer 3: But how would DuckDB know whether it is registered or not? And what would the "Other" type improve things exactly?

Reviewer 8: Could consumer interpret received non-registered types as Other?

Author: Other is **not about the consumer**

Reviewer 4: @paleolimbot your example of duckdb does not really fit under "Other represents a type or array that one Arrow-based system received from an external (likely non-Arrow) system, but cannot interpret itself."? 
In your example duckdb is the producer and is Arrow-aware, so shouldn't they just define an extension type themselves then, instead of using `arrow.other` ? (e.g. `duckdb.point2d`)

Author: I believe that's already addressed?

> I don't want to get hung up on DuckDB specifically (they might not be interested or might be able to implement the ability for runtime-loadable extensions to customize their Arrow export representation before they get a chance to implement this), I just wanted to demonstrate an example where the arbitrary payload that an ADBC driver (or general Arrow consumer) receives is not binary.

Author: Another example might be a PostgreSQL [user defined type](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/xtypes.html)? In principle we might know that it can be represented as a struct but may want to wrap in Other in case it's meant to have additional semantics (as in the example there - a Complex type which the driver might eventually want to properly map to an imaginary Arrow Complex extension type instead of leaving it as a bare struct)

Author: Complex is an example, as stated. In this case the converter would not know about it. Obviously, if it did know about it it would want to use the actual extension type. 

The point is that in the case that the converter does not know about the proper extension type, leaving it as the bare struct representation may be misleading and the converter at least knows that much from PostgreSQL - it would know there is a user defined type with a particular representation but not the intended Arrow representation. Other can communicate this explicitly, just leaving it as an Arrow struct would lose information.

Reviewer 3: Ok, thanks for the explanation. Perhaps this example can be added to the spec as well :-)

Reviewer 4: > it would have to do something like `f"duckdb.{type_name}"` to create the extension name, and I think we are trying to discourage that mechanism (i.e., only export an extension type if it has a type implementation somewhere)

Why would be discourage that? (I would assume that duckdb then also supports it upon import, so it would have an implementation somewhere)

Part of the rationale to explain the `arrow.other` canonical type in this PR now is that you should _not_ use it and still use a normal extension type if you know about the type. 

I used the `ogc.wkb` extension type before as example, asking whether GDAL should then also use this Other type instead. And it was said that that's an example where you should _not_ use it because GDAL perfectly knows that this is WKB data and can signal that to downstream consumers of its Arrow export APIs.

Author: Yeah, I appreciate the examples, I was trying to figure out a good example of a non-binary representation. I think I'll go with PostgreSQL composite types, though relying so heavily on Postgres for all examples also makes me easy

* Extension type parameters:

  * **type_name** = the name of the unknown type in the external system.

>   * **vendor_name** = the name of the external system.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to support an optional `mime_type` key or something?

Reviewer 9: I would be in favor of that

Reviewer 3: > I don't think that any of the places we envision getting this information have any notion of mime type

Who is "we"? Arrow is an open format, it's not company-specific. And you can put tons of different things in databases, not to mention that Arrow is not limited to representing database contents.

Author: mime_type seems overly restrictive and tunnel-visions on the original misleading suggestion in the mailing list of a JSON type...Also the use cases listed are not going to have a mime_type. 

The point again is to NOT provide another way to have generic extension types; this info is purely meant to communicate a bit of human-readable information for context and is NOT meant to provide a convention for applications to coalesce behind. If there's a MIME type you want to see supported, create an actual extension type for it.

Reviewer 3: > mime_type seems overly restrictive and tunnel-visions on the original misleading suggestion in the mailing list of a JSON type...

How is it restrictive to _add_ information? Types which don't have a corresponding MIME type would simply not have that metadata.

(and what does JSON have to do with it?)

> Also the use cases listed are not going to have a mime_type.

Which "use cases listed"?

> If there's a MIME type you want to see supported, create an actual extension type for it.

Creating an extension type doesn't make it magically supported by third-parties.

Reviewer 3: > The target audience here is (I think) general-purpose something-to-Arrow converters, and I am just not aware of any source of that "something" that provides a MIME type (e.g., if libpq had a GetColumnMIMEType function).

"Something"s don't produce MIME types because they produce actual types from their internal type system. It would be the converter's task to infer a MIME type from the "something type" when possible.

Author: The use cases are listed in the doc and have been listed this whole time.

The point of the type is that the converter doesn't know much about it. Asking it to infer a MIME type is just useless ceremony.

Reviewer 4: But at the point where the converter can infer a MIME type, it actually knows the type, and then why not return this annotated with a normal (non-other) extension type?

Author: In any case: my broad point is that something like MIME type is almost an antipattern. This isn't meant to be a generic container for things with MIME types. This is meant for an intermediate Arrow system to declare that they are aware of a field but do not know its true type, and to communicate that. It is not about the consumer, and it is not meant as a base for a consumer to start developing conventions about particular representations.

Reviewer 3: > The use cases are listed in the doc and have been listed this whole time.

Well, I thought this spec was more open-ended. You're basically saying "Other should only be used when a converter receives a type it did not know about in advance", right?

Author: Effectively, yes.

Reviewer 4: >> You're basically saying "Other should only be used when a converter receives a type it did not know about in advance", right?
>
> Effectively, yes

(I still think that "Unknown" might signal that meaning better than "Other")

Reviewer 3: This should probably be spelled out explicitly, and adding a suggestion to create bespoke extension types otherwise.

Author: The suggestion is already present

* Description of the serialization:

  A valid JSON object containing the parameters as fields.  In the future,
  additional fields may be added, but all fields current and future are never
  required to interpret the array.

  For example:

  - The PostgreSQL ``polygon`` type may be represented as Other[binary] with
    metadata ``{"type_name": "polygon", "vendor_name": "PostgreSQL"}``.
  - The PostGIS ``geometry`` type may be represented as Other[binary] with
    metadata ``{"type_name": "geometry", "vendor_name": "PostGIS"}``.
  - A Flight SQL service may return an array type as Other[Null] with metadata

>     ``{"type_name": "varray", "vendor_name": "Oracle"}``.

Author: In this case, it may not even be able to query the data, and the field may only exist inside the catalog. (So yes, there's only a schema, no actual data.)

>     ``{"type_name": "varray", "vendor_name": "Oracle"}``.

Author: I can clarify that

>     ``{"type_name": "varray", "vendor_name": "Oracle"}``.

Author: Another example is if we have a JDBC adapter (which: we do!) JDBC allows returning arbitrary Java objects (and this is part of the JDBC type system too), which we have no way of mapping to Arrow types generically. Right now this is just a hard error in all cases, which makes the JDBC adapter less useful (you may still be interested in the types of other columns which can be converted)

>     ``{"type_name": "varray", "vendor_name": "Oracle"}``.

Reviewer 4: I think it would be good to clarify that yes (it's a good example of why one would use "null", but right now that's not really clear)
